---
categories:
  - learning
date: 2022-01-31
draft: true
tags:
  - seatbelt
title: My Seatbelt Rule for Judgment
---

One of my formative childhood lessons came when I was playing in the garage one
day. I went into my mom's car and put the seatbelt on (probably to pretend I was
flying a plane). I realized at one point that I could still lean pretty far
forward. Far enough that my head could touch the dashboard. This seemed
ridiculous! What's the point of the seatbelt if it doesn't actually stop me from
going too far? I reveled in my discovery that seatbelts were useless.

A while later, I pulled on the seatbelt quickly (a lot happens in imaginary
aerial [dogfights](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dogfight)), and the seatbelt
immediately stopped. An overwhelming feeling of stupidity hit me almost as
fast. Nine-year-old me was not in fact smarter than Toyota engineers.

For anyone who doesn't know what I'm talking about, seatbelts have dynamic
behavior. If you pull on them slowly, they'll extend to the full distance,
allowing you to still have some range of motion. If you pull on them quickly,
which is what would happen in a car crash, they'll stop quickly. If you're
curious how seatbelts work, I recommend watching [this YouTube
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uRaU1HMJyCo) and reading [this
article](https://howcarpartswork.blogspot.com/2016/05/seat-belt-working.html).

Now whenever I'm tempted to judge something as stupidly designed, I try to check
myself and remember my seatbelt experience. My rule of thumb is:

> My willingness to judge something should be roughly proportional to how much I
> know about it.

Sometimes things really are poorly designed (check out [The Design of Everyday
Things](https://www.amazon.com/Design-Everyday-Things-Revised-Expanded/dp/0465050654?&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=073e8798f7afc5fba508aa95f8813219&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl)),
but I should give more benefit of the doubt when I don't know much about the
subject. There can be so many competing and nonobvious trade-offs when it comes
to designing anything, and an aspect of something's design can be a positive in
one context and a negative in another.

In the case of the seatbelt, I had only considered the context of a car crash,
not the context of the normal situation. In this case, the ingenuity of
engineers appears to have solved for both cases.

Even for things I know somewhat well, that's still relative to my knowledge in
other things. There's so much I don't know.
