---
categories:
  -
date:
draft: true
tags:
  -
title: Think in Spectrums Rather Than Binaries
---

One of the most important lessons I have learned is that it is better to think
in spectrums rather than binaries. Thinking in binaries means seeing the world
in black and white. This isn't always a bad thing, but a part of growing up is
learning that people and the world in general are far more complex than they
might seem at first. Thinking in spectrums makes mental room for nuance and the
limitless shades of gray.

## People

Keeping this principle in mind is more important when the topic is more
emotionally charged. It's easy to label someone a racist for saying a single
thing, but racism is not a yes/no issue.

I remember having lunch with a friend in college, and he told me that he didn't
like it when people reduce others to single attributes, turning them into
caricatures of themselves. That thought has stuck with me.

## Ideas

I try to always consider the other side of any argument, no matter what it is. I
don't have any belief that is sacred enough for me to make it a black and white
issue.

When other people make claims that I don't agree with, I try to be more
interested in *why* they made that claim rather than in the claim itself.

And I try to avoid the [fundamental attribution
error](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_attribution_error).

This is related to the idea of requiring precision: show, don't tell. "He is a
good person" is vague and unconvincing. "He volunteers on the weekends" is much
more interesting. Specificity cuts through bullshit.

## Dimensions

But even spectrum thinking isn't enough. A close idea is that judgments are
frequently conditional. A bad idea might only be bad under certain conditions.
As I've gotten older, I find myself saying "it depends" more frequently.

So we have three levels of thinking.

1. He is a good person.
2. He is a good person who does good things a and b, which outweigh bad things c
   and d.
3. He is a good person who does a, b, c, and d, each of which are dependent on
   factors x, y, and z.

## Caveats

Thinking in binaries is most justified when there is an immediate time pressure.
You don't always have the luxury of time to deliberate. But these situations
don't happen enough to justify how often we oversimplify the world.

This is like Daniel Kahneman's distinction between system 1 and system 2
thinking in [Thinking, Fast and
Slow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinking,_Fast_and_Slow).
