---
categories:
  - education
date:
draft: true
tags:
  - html
title: What I Learned by Relearning Html
---

I've been making websites for close to a decade now, both professionally and for
side projects. One day, I reflected on the fact that all of my web development
education has come in the middle of actually making websites. In most cases, I'd
have a specific problem, I'd Google how to solve it, and I'd learn something new
in the process.

I wondered what I was missing by never actually learning HTML in a comprehensive
way. Forget CSS and JavaScript. I'm just talking about raw HTML. It might seem
laughable to go back to such a basic aspect of web development after a
nontrivial amount of experience, but I've realized how easy it is to feel
competent with a skill just because you know enough to do a few useful things.

So I set out to relearn HTML and find out what I didn't know.

## Experience

For context, I made my first website in middle school for a class project. We
learned basic HTML, and I felt like a wizard when I discovered that I could
embed a MP3 song.

I didn't touch web development again until college. I made a lightweight news
aggregator called [The Daily Lore](https://www.dailylore.com/) that's still
running (I preserved what it originally looked like
[here](https://www.dailylore.com/legacy)).

Since then, I've worked on two websites professionally, one website for a
[nonprofit](https://sublimefund.org/), and a few tiny websites for side
projects.

## Introduction to HTML5

I wouldn't consider myself to be a web development expert, but I surely had way
more experience than the typical student for
[Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/)'s [Introduction to
HTML5](https://www.coursera.org/learn/html) course. So I started the course
expecting to know a lot of the content already, especially since the course was
designed for complete beginners with no programming backgrounds.

As I went through the course, I did in fact know a lot of the material already,
but I was surprised by how much was still new to me. I knew enough to make a
functional website, but the course reminded me about the importance of using
semantic elements and about techniques to improve accessibility, things I had
never paid much attention to.

Instead of semantic elements, I usually used a lot of generic divs to make what
I needed. The course taught me that in a lot of cases, there are specific
elements to use to represent specific content.

Accessibility was also something I had never considered in depth. I knew that
images should have alt descriptions, and that was about it.

## Reading the Documentation

I have a friend who is probably the only person I know who has read the entire
[NFL rulebook](https://operations.nfl.com/the-rules) (the 2020 version is 87
pages long). Watching football with him was fun because he was so good at
understanding weird situations and how the referees would act. I figured there
was a similar opportunity for me with HTML.

The exact equivalent would be to read the [HTML
standard](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/) for every HTML element, but I decided
to read the MDN documentation instead.

I didn't intend to come out as a master of HTML. Rather, I generally find it
incredibly useful just to be aware of what is out there. I can't recall all the
details about using a `picture` element, but now that I know it exists, I can
always look up the relevant details later.

It's a categorical difference from not being aware of it at all.

I read the entire page for each one, took notes, and made Anki cards from the
notes.

There are a lot of deprecated elements that I only skimmed through and didn't
bother to take notes.

But even then, there were dozens of elements that I had never used before. On
top of that, there were many interesting details and attributes that I didn't
know about.

## What I Learned

The [address](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/address)
element is for contact information, not just physical, mailing addresses.

## Conclusion

It was easy to feel confident about HTML after doing web development for a few
years, but there was tremendous value in going back to learn it in a somewhat
more rigorous manner.

I still think learning by doing can be a great method, but this experience has
made me want to go back and learn other things with a bottom up approach.
