---
categories:
  - writing
date: 2022-04-20
draft: true
tags:
  -
title: Why I Blog
---

Some people have asked me why I blog. Here are my reasons, in roughly decreasing
order of importance to me.

## Clarify My Thinking

## Sharing Knowledge

## Learn Things

## Practice Writing

## Learn How I'm Wrong

I've learned that publishing things to the internet is a fantastic way to
quickly learn what I am mistaken about or haven't considered.

## Being Able to Provide a Link

When a topic or question comes up that I have written about, I love being able
to just provide a link to my post instead of trying to recreate my past thoughts
in a way that will inevitably be less coherent than my post. For example, a
co-worker mentioned running low on hard drive space, and I just linked to my
post on [clearing Mac storage
space](https://www.dannyguo.com/blog/clearing-mac-storage-space/).

This has happened more often than I would have expected, considering I don't
have that many posts.

If someone asks me why I blog again, I have this post to link to!

## Vanity

It feels good when one of my posts gets many hits. The vanity factor is real,
though I try not to let it affect my writing. I try to write about what I am
interested in writing about, rather than trying to work backwards and write
posts that I think will be popular.

## Unexpected Opportunities

My writing provided an unexpected opportunity. Someone from
[LogRocket](https://logrocket.com) read one of my posts and invited me to write
paid posts for [their technical blog](https://blog.logrocket.com/). I've written
[some posts](https://blog.logrocket.com/author/dannyguo) for them.  I basically
use these as chances to get paid to learn new things.

## Monetization

If traffic builds up to a high enough level, I could add some lightweight,
developer-focused ads using [Carbon](https://www.carbonads.net) to some of my
posts. Though Dan Luu has a good [post on this
topic](https://danluu.com/blog-ads/), and I agree that it may not be worth the
influence it could have on my writing behavior. I'm also not sure if I want to
clutter my own blog with ads. On the other hand they are only single images and
should be relatively relevant to the visitor. I've never minded Carbon ads on
other sites.

I do already add Amazon affiliate links when I would have linked to a product
anyway. I linked to The Design of Everyday Things in [this
post](https://www.dannyguo.com/blog/my-seatbelt-rule-for-judgment/), and I would
have done so anyway. I made about $200 from that link. That was a nice,
unexpected benefit. And according to Amazon, people bought 30 copies of the book
through my link. That felt good, considering that I think it's a fantastic book.

## Conclusion

More than anything else, I hope this post encourages someone else to blog or
share what they know in whatever medium they prefer. When someone tells me about
something interesting, I tend to say "you should blog about this!" Nobody has
ever taken me up on it, and the world misses out on it.
