---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - review
date: "2020-10-18"
tags:
  - headphones
title: BEBEN X8 Review
---

The [BEBEN X8
headphones](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B07PN2FK2W/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&psc=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=c7e6ea9cd21015aa5bb8bae9d67481db&language=en_US)
are a set of true wireless headphones, like the [Apple
Airpods](https://www.amazon.com/Apple-AirPods-Charging-Latest-Model/dp/B07PXGQC1Q/ref=as_li_ss_tl?dchild=1&keywords=airpods&qid=1597609643&s=electronics&sr=1-3&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=f74c368f5b3a2c83060da85acc1b2394&language=en_US),
which are probably the [market
leader](https://fortune.com/2019/08/06/apple-airpods-business/) in this
category.

Many of the big electronics companies have made their own versions. Samsung has
[Galaxy
Buds](https://www.amazon.com/Samsung-Wireless-Earbuds-Cancelling-Warranty/dp/B089B658NP/ref=as_li_ss_tl?dchild=1&keywords=galaxy+buds&qid=1597609784&s=electronics&sr=1-6&th=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=db5cafcb0e4ebeeae94ba2966657ebbd&language=en_US),
Sony has
[WF-1000XM3](https://www.amazon.com/Sony-WF-1000XM3-Industry-Canceling-Wireless/dp/B07T81554H/ref=as_li_ss_tl?dchild=1&keywords=sony+wf-1000xm3&qid=1597611240&s=electronics&sr=1-3&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=50eb905f27c0da50abc99f7c348f0e91&language=en_US)s,
and Google has [Pixel Buds](https://store.google.com/us/product/pixel_buds).
But when I looked into buying a pair of true wireless headphones, I realized
that it has become a commoditized technology. Amazon has plenty of more
affordable (less than $100) options from relatively unknown brands.

I planned to use my headphones mainly while exercising, and I knew exactly what
features I was looking for and which I didn't really care about. Your needs may
be very different from mine.

The two key things I wanted were:

1. Explicit waterproofing so that I can use them while running in the rain
2. Physical buttons instead of touch or voice controls

Audio quality was not that important to me, and I cared even less about
microphone quality. I also wasn't concerned about battery life, since I didn't
plan to use them much while traveling.

While many options on Amazon have waterproofing, the X8s were one of the few
with physical buttons. I also liked that the case supports wireless charging.

I also came across two interesting features that I haven't seen with the
well-known options. The first is an LED display to show exactly how much charge
is left. The second is that the charging case can have a USB port to charge your
phone, allowing the case to double as an external battery. [This
pair](https://www.amazon.com/Ultimate-Bluetooth-Headphones-Waterproof-Earphones/dp/B07W87HQ6G/ref=as_li_ss_tl?dchild=1&keywords=true+wireless+headphones+waterproof&qid=1601255652&sr=8-4&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=c9e0430a4701d74fc4056204995bdbf&language=en_US)
has both features.

I bought my X8s for $46, but I've seen them go as low as $30 since then.

## Pictures

Here's what the packaging looks like.

![Front of the box](https://i.imgur.com/3eMQJ6s.jpg)

![Back of the box](https://i.imgur.com/JbWmpQE.jpg)

The package comes with the case, the headphones, a short Micro-USB to USB cable,
a lanyard, and several sets of differently sized tips.

![Package contents](https://i.imgur.com/klvZ7SV.jpg)

Note that I've used my X8s for over a year, so the case has some normal wear.

![Back of the case](https://i.imgur.com/oIMtbz0.jpg)

![Micro-USB charging port](https://i.imgur.com/abeqHrQ.jpg)

![Bottom of the case](https://i.imgur.com/gLbsKnI.jpg)

![Earbuds in the case](https://i.imgur.com/rhSXU9w.jpg)

![Earbud](https://i.imgur.com/LzFRf9O.jpg)

## Waterproofing

I've gone running several times in the rain with my X8s, and they have always
handled the water just fine. They are [IP
rated](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_Code) for IP68, which means that they do
not allow any dust in and are resistant to submersion in water up to 1 meter in
depth, but I haven't tested actually submerging them.

## Battery Life and Charging

I've used my X8s for over a year, and battery life has never been a problem for
me. The package claims that the headphones last 5 hours on a single charge.

The case has a Micro-USB port for charging. I do wish this was a USB-C port
instead, but it's hard to complain for the price.

The case also supports wireless charging, which is how I normally charge it.

## Connecting

The earbuds automatically go into pairing/connecting mode when you take them out
of the case. There have been a few times when I wished there was a way to
manually make the earbuds pair. When I've needed to switch devices, I had to put
the earbuds back into the case and take them back out to get them into pairing
mode again.

I've also had to do it a few times when the earbuds didn't connect immediately.
I think this has only happened when I took the earbuds out before turning on
Bluetooth on my phone. When I use my earbuds now, I've gotten into the habit of
turning on Bluetooth first before removing the earbuds from the case.

Sometime the audio does cut out in one headphone for a few seconds while I'm
running, but it only happens about once for every several hours of usage.

## Audio and Microphone Quality

The X8 audio quality is perfectly acceptable to me. I listen to podcasts more
often than music with them, but even music sounds fine. The sound isn't tinny at
all.

The microphones, on the other hand, are not good. When I tried having a phone
coversation while using them, the other person had a hard time understanding
what I was saying.

## Controls

I wanted physical buttons, mainly for quick volume adjustments without having to
mess with a touch sensitive interface or having to speak to a digital assistant,
which I think would be annoying to do while running.

They work as reliably as I expected. I can press either button once to pause or
play. Holding the left one increases the volume, and holding the right one
decreases it.

I frequently adjust the volume when I'm running, and I love not having to pull
out my phone or speak to a virtual assistant to do it.

## Conclusion

I've been very happy with my X8s. They cost a fraction of the price of the
options from the well-known brands, while having the physical buttons that I
think make a superior interface for headphones.
