---
categories:
  - finance
draft: true
tags:
  - retirement
title: Contributing to Retirement as a Medical Resident
---

Some of my friends who have started their medical residencies have asked me what
they should know regarding contributing to their retirement savings. This guide
is intended to provide a brief overview without going into excessive,
potentially confusing details.

Disclaimer: I am not a financial professional, nor do I hold any financial
licenses. This post is for informational purposes only and is not intended to
serve as professional investment advice. It may not apply to your individual
situation.

## 401(k)

Let's go over the basic terms first. Beyond Social Security and regular savings
accounts, the U.S. government has institutionalized many types of retirement
accounts. The common attribute is that they offer some sort of tax advantage to
incentivize people to save for retirement.

In the past, many companies offered pensions, which is a plan in which employees
receive fixed payments after retirement. Pension plans have become rare. Most
companies only offer 401(k)s now.

A traditional [401(k)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/401(k)) (which is named
that because it is defined in section 401(k) of the [Internal Revenue
Code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internal_Revenue_Code)) is an
employer-sponsored retirement account in which the employee can contribute
pre-tax money to the account. You can then invest the money in stocks, bonds,
etc. After retirement, you begin to withdraw money and pay taxes on the
withdrawals. Because you are paying taxes much later during retirement rather
than while you are working, you can end up with significantly more money than if
you had invested the money normally. The restriction is that you generally can't
take money out before age 59 1/2 without penalties.

Some employers also have a matching program in which they will contribute to
your retirement account as well if you contribute. For example, the company
might offer to match up to 50 cents on the dollar up to 6% of your salary (a
[fairly common
policy](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/personal-finance/120315/what-good-401k-match.asp)).
So if you make $70,000 a year and contribute 10% to your 401(k), you'll
contribute $7,000 (10% of $70,000), and your employer will contribute an
additional $2,100 ($0.50 * 6% of $70,000). An employer match is effectively free
money!

The current annual contribution limit to a 401(k) is $19,000. This limit only
applies to your own contributions. It does not apply to employer match
contributions.

## Traditional vs. Roth

An alternative to the traditional 401(k) is a Roth 401(k). The main difference
is that with a Roth 401(k), you contribute post-tax money instead of pre-tax
money. Contributing to a Roth 401(k) doesn't reduce your taxable income.
However, the advantage is that you don't pay any taxes on the money that you you
withdraw after retirement. In other words, with a traditional 401(k), you pay
taxes later. With a Roth 401(k), you pay taxes now.

Deciding whether to go with a traditional or Roth 401(k) depends on individual
circumstances, but a general guideline is that you should prefer contributing to
a Roth if you expect your tax rate to be higher when you retire. This might make
sense for medical residents in particular because their salaries tend to be
quite low relative to what they will make post-residency.

## 403(b)

A [403(b)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/403(b)) is very similar to a 401(k),
but a 403(b) is only available to 501\(c)(3) non-profit organizations, public
education organizations, and self-employed ministers. Some medical residents
will have a 403(b) as an option rather than a 401(k).

## IRA

[IRA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Individual_retirement_account) stands for
Individual Retirement Account. Unlike a 401(k) or 403(b), these are not
sponsored by an employer. You can open one on your own, but you do need earned
income in order to contribute to it. The contribution limit is currently $6,000
per year. Like 401(k)s, IRAs come in traditional or Roth types.

## Retirement strategy

There are many factors you should consider when deciding your retirement
strategy. As a resident, your hospital most likely offers a 401(k) or 403(b).

The first thing you need to find out is if they offer matching. If they do, then
you should try to take full advantage.

If they don't offer a match, then I recommend opening an IRA for several
reasons.

If you open an IRA, you'll definitely have the choice of opening a Roth IRA.
Your IRA is Roth, which is better for you right now. Maybe Sinai also offers
a Roth 403(b) but if not, that's a big plus for the IRA.

### Simpler finances

Your money won't be spread out across yet another account. You may be somewhere
different after residency, at which point you'd have to maintain an account just
for your residency hospital or deal with the hassle of rolling the money over to
an IRA.

### Fund options

You probably have better fund options in your IRA. Some employer accounts don't
have great options (high fund fees).

## How much to contribute

## Conclusion

Essentially, there is no benefit to contributing to a 403(b) unless your
employer offers matching or you can afford to max out your IRA contribution and
have additional money you want to put towards retirement.
