---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - thinking
date: "2023-04-29"
unlisted: true
tags:
  - debates
title: Debates as Competitions
---

When I started high school, I attended an info session for the debate team. I
was excited because I had a notion of what debates would be like: a group of
people discussing interesting and important topics and reaching conclusions
based on evidence and reasoning. It hadn't occurred to me that in the context of
high school debate, a debate is a competition. And in any competition, the
ultimate point is to win.

A feeling of disappointment washed over me as we went over the
[structure](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vov8e-Ic6mQ) of a [Lincoln-Douglas
debate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lincoln%E2%80%93Douglas_debate_format). I
realized that you win a debate by making the most convincing case for your side
of the position, and what side you would actually take outside of the debate is
irrelevant. This seemed hopelessly disingenuous to me.

I moved shortly after that, and my new high school didn't have a debate team, so
I never did try out competitive debate. In retrospect, my initial reaction was
mistaken (I'll come back to this later). But what does make for a great debate?
I can think of several qualities to strive for.

## Good Intentions

The participants should be well-intentioned in terms of wanting to reach the
best conclusion, to better understand a potentially complex issue, and to have
an idea of what would cause them to change their minds.

The intent shouldn't be to win because that attitude is inherently in conflict
with the possibility that we are wrong. Yes, we should strive to make the
strongest arguments we can, but there is a subtle and important distinction
between *trying* to win and *wanting* to win. Trying to win means bringing our
best thoughts to the discussion (and ideally hoping that others do the same).
Wanting to win means losing sight of what the real goal of the debate should be.
It's difficult to reach the best conclusion if we care too much about who
proposed what idea.

I understand the appeal of wanting to win. Winning is fun! But outside of an
artificially zero-sum environment like a competitive debate, a debate doesn't
need to be about winning. Getting an ego boost is nice, but realizing that you
were wrong about something is so much more valuable. Even if nobody changes
their minds in the end, other signs of a well-intentioned debate are people
acknowledging good points that others make as well as admitting weaknesses in
their own points.

We should avoid starting a debate with the mindset that we're definitely right
because that makes us defensive. It can also mean that we start with the
conclusion in mind already, making it a belief that could even be a part of our
sense of identity. And that makes it [difficult to stay
open-minded](http://www.paulgraham.com/identity.html).

## Common Understanding

One of the biggest issues that I've noticed in debates is when the participants
aren't really on the same page about what they are even debating. This sounds
dumb, but I've seen it happen so many times. We can't read each other's minds
directly, so we can only go off of what we actively communicate, and it's easy
for language to be imprecise and ambiguous anyway.

Unstated premises, definitions, motivations, and chains of reasoning can easily
cause unproductive debates. Especially when we make assumptions about what
others are thinking and don't verify those assumptions.

The challenge is that trying to explain everything can quickly lead to
discussions that are too abstract and far from the original topic. For example,
if I want to debate something like "is the death penalty unjust?" my first
instinct is to ask what the other person's definition of justice is. To some
extent, we need to allow for assumptions that we're already aligned about
certain things.

But the more we can turn implicit thoughts explicit, the less likely we are to
have a pointless discussion. We can focus on what we are actually disagreeing on
and stop talking about different things.

## Evidence

We should provide evidence when appropriate, along with citations. If an
argument depends on evidence, then the quality of the argument becomes dependent
on the quality of the evidence. This presents a good opportunity for changing
our minds later if the evidence changes or if we realize that the evidence was
missing some important nuance.

## Counterarguments

One of my pet peeves is when there seem to be obvious counteraguments, but they
aren't brought up and addressed. I want to hear the strongest arguments for each
side of an issue, not the weakest ones.

One of my favorite episodes of [The West
Wing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_West_Wing) is [The
Supremes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Supremes_(The_West_Wing)). In
particular, a brief debate between Chris Mulready and Charlie about [affirmative
action](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affirmative_action) has always stuck with
me. Here's the transcript of [the scene](https://youtu.be/q4m-3Eo3suE?t=40):

> (Mulready) So why a racial preference and not an economic one?

> (Charlie) Because affirmative action's about a legacy of racial oppression.

> (Mulready) It's about compromising admission standards.

> (Charlie) That's bull..excuse me. It's about leveling the playing field after
> 300 years of..

> (Mulready) See, this is where the liberal argument goes off the rails. You
> get stuck in the past. Now, you want to come back at me with: grading is
> based on past performance, but admission should be based on potential, on how
> a candidate may thrive with this sort of opportunity. And studies show
> affirmative action admits have a higher predisposition to contribute to
> society.

> (Charlie) Hang on, I gotta write this down.

Mulready is capable of articulating an argument for the opposing position. And
he's doing so in relatively good faith. He's basically saying "of these
potential justifications for your position, here's the one that I find most
compelling."

## No Dodging

People shouldn't be allowed to dodge an argument or a piece of evidence. Some
people consider it a skill when debaters dodge the question by either ignoring
it and answering the question that they really wanted to be asked. I agree it's
a skill, but that doesn't mean we should encourage it.

## Competitive Debates

As a high schooler, where would I have gone to for an organized way to discuss
issues? Despite my initial reaction, competitive debate probably would have been
the best place. I've watched [videos of championship
debates](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqjHz9laqgU), and the level of
discourse is far higher than what I typically experience in everyday life.

Even if competitive debators don't have genuine intentions during an actual
debate, I am sure they are much better than I am at thinking about all sides of
a debate. Which is why I don't agree with my high school reaction that it seems
disingenous.

## Political Debates

My real issue is with televised political debates. They generally fail to
fulfill any of the qualities that I listed.

Politicians aren't going to change their minds in the middle of a debate, and
they almost never admit that ther opponent has made a good point.

They transparently avoid answering questions and frequently try to pivot their
answer to a topic that they actually want to talk about.

We have fact checkers after the fact or sometimes even during the debates, but
that in itself is disheartening because it means the debates proceed with
statements that can't be relied on.

## Conclusion

When debating with someone, it's easy to get into the mindset of wanting to win.
But outside of competitions, the real winner is the person who expands his or
her mindset and grasps the nuances of all sides of the argument.

The true test of a belief is being able to argue for the other side even better
than they can but then still being able to counter that argument. Most people
don't bother with this exercise. It requires humility and effort, and our
entrenched beliefs make it hard to be honest with ourselves. But it's what we
should strive to do to make our debates as good as they can be.
