---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - performance
date: "2020-08-02"
tags:
  - mac
title: Fixing MacBook Pro Thermal Performance Issues
---

Over the past several months, my 2018 15" MacBook Pro developed thermal
performance issues. Here's what I did to fix the problem. The two key changes
were that I switched to using the right side [Thunderbolt
3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thunderbolt_(interface)#Thunderbolt_3) ports
instead of the left side ones, and I cleaned the dust buildup in the internal
fans.

## The Problem

The problem first started when I noticed my CPU usage spiking to near 100%. In
the process list, I saw `kernel_task` taking up most of the CPU.

I [learned](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT207359) that macOS does this
intentionally to prevent the CPU from overheating.

> One of the functions of kernel_task is to help manage CPU temperature by
> making the CPU less available to processes that are using it intensely. In
> other words, kernel_task responds to conditions that cause your CPU to become
> too hot, even if your Mac doesn't feel hot to you. It does not itself cause
> those conditions. When the CPU temperature decreases, kernel_task
> automatically reduces its activity.

## Fan Speed

For many years, I've used
[smcFanControl](https://github.com/hholtmann/smcFanControl) to manually increase
my fan speed because I don't mind fan noise, especially if it means getting
better performance out of my laptop or being able to comfortably put it on my
lap.

However, it stopped working reliably after a macOS update. I purchased [iStat
Menus](https://bjango.com/mac/istatmenus/), which comes with a well supported
fan control feature. Note that you have to buy it from their own website to get
fan control. The Mac App Store version [doesn't include that particular
feature](https://bjango.com/help/istatmenus6/macappstore/) for some reason.

I turned the fans up to max regularly in an attempt to preempt the `kernel_task`
issue, but it still kept popping up.

## Thunderbolt 3 Ports

I found [this excellent StackExchange
answer](https://apple.stackexchange.com/a/363933/275342) that recommends using
the right side Thunderbolt 3 ports instead of the left side ones. Apparently the
ports aren't equal. The left ones can cause thermal issues. Also, using both
ports on either side can be problematic.

I use a [Thunderbolt 3
dock](https://www.amazon.com/CalDigit-TS3-Plus-Thunderbolt-Dock/dp/B07CZPV8DF/ref=as_li_ss_tl?crid=223U28DX1402C&dchild=1&keywords=caldigit+ts3+plus&qid=1595940705&sprefix=caldigit+,aps,223&sr=8-2&th=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=016d783904cae8cac9d952a3c58d816b&language=en_US)
for a single cable solution that handles charging and all my peripherals,
including monitors. I tended to plug it into a left port. I switched it over to
a right port and saw an immediate difference in temperature. iStat Menus reports
the temperatures from various sensors.

![iStat Menus temperature readings](https://i.imgur.com/2oiPxjF.png)

I tested and verified that using a left port caused the CPU temperature to go up
much higher than using a right port.

For a few months, this simple change was enough to resolve the issue. Luckily, I
was able to continue using a single cable, and I didn't have to plug in my dock
on one side and then a separate charger on the other side.

## Resolution Scaling

Then the problem started happening again. I also experienced issues playing
[Tabletop Simulator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tabletop_Simulator),
[Counter-Strike](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counter-Strike:_Global_Offensive),
and [Valorant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valorant) (on Windows through Boot
Camp), all games that my machine should be able to handle without any problems.
It would stutter even after I turned the resolution and graphical settings all
the way down.

I thought it might have something to do with my monitors. In my desk setup, I
have two external monitors that I run at a scaled resolution that looks like
2560 x 1440.

![external display resolution](https://i.imgur.com/xPz7nXG.png)

Note the warning that "Using a scaled resolution may affect performance." The
problem is that macOS [achieves this
resolution](https://github.com/kovidgoyal/kitty/issues/1043) by rendering
everything in double the size and then scaling it down. So my MacBook is
essentially doing the rendering work for two 5K monitors.

![System Information displays](https://i.imgur.com/0oroxGb.png)

See [this
thread](https://forums.macrumors.com/threads/4k-monitor-at-1440p-scaling-performance.2232164/)
or [this StackExchange answer](https://apple.stackexchange.com/a/338581/275342)
for more details.

I considered turning the resolution down to look like 1920 x 1080, which isn't a
scaled resolution, but then everything looked too big.

I was pretty frustrated at this point, especially because
[Zoom](https://zoom.us/) video calls started freezing up on me. I got into the
habit of unplugging my monitors before joining video calls.

## Dust

This entire time, I thought the problem was my MacBook producing too much heat.
Beyond making the fans run at max more often, I never considered that the
problem could be that it stopped being able to get rid of heat.

Then I read [this
post](https://quanticdev.com/articles/cleaning-macbook-after-16800-hours-of-use/)
from someone who cleaned the inside of a MacBook after 7 years of use. I was
initially skeptical that clogged fans were my problem because my MacBook was
only about a year and a half old. But the more I thought about it, the more it
made sense, and I didn't have anything to lose by trying to clean it.

To open my MacBook, I followed [this iFixit
guide](https://www.ifixit.com/Guide/MacBook+Pro+15-Inch+Touch+Bar+2018+Lower+Case+Replacement/121426).

### AutoBoot

I learned that by default, macOS turns on the MacBook when you press any button
(not just the power button) or open the lid. This was very surprising to me. I
did recall being confused in the past when my MacBook turned on even though I
didn't press the power button. When it first happened, I thought there was
something wrong. At least from Apple's perspective, it turns out [this is a
feature, not a bug](https://www.wired.com/story/its-not-a-bug-its-a-feature/).

So to make sure the MacBook stays off through the process, you have to run this
in a terminal to turn off booting on lid open.

```sh
sudo nvram AutoBoot=%00
```

To turn the setting back on later, run this. Though I just left mine off after I
was done.

```sh
sudo nvram AutoBoot=%03
```

### Removing the Bottom

The next step was to take off the screws. Apple uses [pentalobe
screws](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pentalobe_security_screw).

![pentalobe screw](https://i.imgur.com/FQndl8j.jpg)

I've opened MacBooks before to replace [swollen
batteries](https://www.reddit.com/r/spicypillows), so I was prepared with an
[electronics screwdriver
set](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B072HNBL9Z/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&psc=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=09c787c5245a192a816fd263da8ad7ea&language=en_US)
that includes pentalobe bits.  I also had a [can of compressed
air](https://www.amazon.com/Endust-Electronics-Compressed-bitterant-11407/dp/B00HX7VZ5M/ref=as_li_ss_tl?dchild=1&keywords=endust+duster&qid=1596317241&sr=8-4&th=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=4bb9cd9f61cc6a4a158ec8dfbfb00e3d&language=en_US).

![screwdriver and duster](https://i.imgur.com/JWhg3vL.jpg)

I removed the screws and learned that Apple has made the bottom harder to open
because now you need a suction cup. I repurposed the suction cup from my [car
dash cell phone
holder](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B07GKXPL6M/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&psc=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=a201bd337a2a7814cff67674269ea94f&language=en_US).

![cell phone holder with suction cup](https://i.imgur.com/ewlAsGh.jpg)

You have to use the suction cup to lift part of the bottom enough to slide in
something to release a few internal latches. I used a library card.

![lifting the bottom cover](https://i.imgur.com/tDEaslF.jpg)

### Cleaning the Dust

Once I got my MacBook open, it was obvious that dust was the main cause of my
performance issues. Just taking the bottom off caused a cloud of dust to come
out.

![dust on the bottom cover](https://i.imgur.com/CN5oz3j.jpg)

There was also cat hair from this troublemaker.

![my cat](https://i.imgur.com/Feill8c.jpg)

Both fans were totally gunked up.

![dust on the inside](https://i.imgur.com/IAGcS0j.jpg)

![dust on the left fan](https://i.imgur.com/BF8Sinf.jpg)

![dust on the right fan](https://i.imgur.com/gX2FxJ5.jpg)

I used compressed air to blow out the dust. I also used a toothpick to get some
off the fans that wouldn't come off from blowing alone.

![overview after cleaning](https://i.imgur.com/BxW6OOp.jpg)

![left fan after cleaning](https://i.imgur.com/OMmeXnG.jpg)

![fan closeup after cleaning](https://i.imgur.com/E60RF3J.jpg)

I put the cover back on and haven't had any more thermal performance issues.

## Retrospective

It would be nice if macOS could provide some actionable advice when
`kernel_task` is trying to stop the MacBook from overheating. I would have
appreciated an OS suggestion to use the right side Thunderbolt 3 ports.

But I also never considered that my laptop fans could require cleaning. In
retrospect, that's foolish because I've seen how dirty it can get in desktop
PCs, and I know that heat is an inhibitor to computer performance. It's just
like running in humid weather. Your body starts shutting down because its main
mechanism for getting rid of heat (sweating) stops working because humidity
prevents sweat from evaporating.

It would be cool if the machine could detect and alert when the fans are no
longer effective, perhaps with a sensor that looks for a lack of airflow at the
vents.

To prevent the issue from occurring again, I've set up a recurring task in
[Todoist](https://todoist.com/r/danny_guo_xlyrub) to remind me to clean my
computers once a year.
