---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - programming
date: "2024-03-06"
tags: side-project
title: Making Make a README
---
import Video from "../../components/video.astro";

My side project with the highest gratification-to-effort ratio is a simple
website called [Make a README](https://www.makeareadme.com) (the source is [on
GitHub](https://github.com/dguo/make-a-readme)). I made it in 2017 on a whim. I
was trying to use a third party library that had an anemic README, and it
reminded me of all the other frustrating times I've run into inadequate
documentation and wished that [Stripe](https://stripe.com/docs) could
[write](https://mintlify.com/blog/stripe-docs) all the software documentation
in the world.

I thought of [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com) and decided to make
a similar website for READMEs that explains what they are and suggests what to
put in them.

## Development

I [started](https://github.com/dguo/make-a-readme/pull/1/files) with a simple
`index.html`. I used [Bulma](https://bulma.io/) for styling and
[Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/) for hosting. I
[added](https://github.com/dguo/make-a-readme/commit/4673555488b77348a10371622470e03beca4b853)
a [Markdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown) template with a live
preview and some more content over the next few days, and I was done! I posted
the website to a couple of subreddits, it got a few thousand hits, the traffic
died down, and I mostly forgot about the project.

But a year later, I noticed in Google Analytics that traffic was consistently
increasing. Google Search had started highly ranking the website for queries
like "readme" and "readme template". Today, Google still drives the vast
majority of traffic. Here are the top ten queries for the past month:

![Google Search queries](https://i.imgur.com/JLUu8bj.jpg)

I've tweaked the content over the years, but the website is largely the same as
it started. I did
[migrate](https://github.com/dguo/make-a-readme/commit/090671b329ec998965f8fc9cc898a9c9c4386ab0)
the styling to [Tailwind](https://tailwindui.com/), and I
[started](https://github.com/dguo/make-a-readme/commit/58acff6f9335c86d12d037c347c9d4958ce0de26)
using [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/) in preparation for some future
enhancements if I ever carve out the time to do them.

For analytics, I started using [Plausible](https://plausible.io) after Google
[shut down Universal
Analytics](https://blog.google/products/ads-commerce/upgrade-to-google-analytics-4-before-july-1/)
with [no way](https://webmasters.stackexchange.com/a/135975/93213) to migrate
historical data into Google Analytics 4, which made it a particularly good time
to find something new. One reason I picked Plausible is that it allows me to
make the analytics for a website
public, which I [did for Make a README](https://plausible.io/makeareadme.com/).
As anyone can see, the website has had about two million visitors all time.

![Plausible screenshot](https://i.imgur.com/fDVtnRq.jpg)

## Editable Template

The only aspect of the website that isn't just text is the editable README
template in Markdown. For the editor, I use
[react-textarea-autosize](https://github.com/Andarist/react-textarea-autosize),
which provides a
[textarea](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/textarea)
that automatically resizes based on the content.

For the renderer, I use
[react-markdown](https://github.com/remarkjs/react-markdown) in conjunction
with [github-markdown-css](https://github.com/sindresorhus/github-markdown-css)
to make the output have GitHub's Markdown styling.

I also pass in a custom renderer for [code
elements](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/code) in
order to use
[react-syntax-highlighter](https://github.com/react-syntax-highlighter/react-syntax-highlighter)
for syntax highlighting. It was a little tricky to figure out how to set this
up with Next.js and [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) because I
wanted to use the async version of `react-syntax-highlighter`. The end result
is that the renderer can do syntax highlighting for most languages, but the
syntax file for a particular language will only be downloaded if the visitor
actually chooses the language.

In this video, you can see that when I change the code block's language from
[Python](https://www.python.org/) to [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/), I get
a `react-syntax-highlighter` file that's just for Rust. I do also get a file
for [R](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R_(programming_language)), since that's a
valid language.

<Video imgurId="4aIjsYb" />

Most visitors will probably never get to the point of using a different
language, so I'm happy to have avoided making them download unnecessary code.

## Monetization

The website costs me virtually nothing to run, considering it's a static
website. I'm on Netlify's [free starter
plan](https://www.netlify.com/pricing/), which includes 100 GB of bandwidth
every month, and Make a README only uses about 7 GB a month. So apart from the
domain name, there aren't any operating costs.

But traffic was high enough that I wanted to use the website as an opportunity
to experiment with monetization, even as just a learning experience. I added
developer-focused ads with [Carbon](https://www.carbonads.net/). I was okay with
doing it because Carbon only adds a single display ad that has a decent chance
of being relevant to the intended audience. Plus I never minded Carbon ads on
other websites. I made a total of $153.36 from Carbon over about five months
(about $30.67 per month).

Then I moved to the now defunct
[CodeFund](https://github.com/gitcoinco/code_fund_ads) platform, which had
higher payouts in my testing, didn't use cookies, and was open source. I made a
total of $443.73 from CodeFund over about 11 months (about $40.33 per month).

After CodeFund shut down, I eventually switched to
[EthicalAds](https://www.ethicalads.io/), which is a part of [Read the
Docs](https://readthedocs.com/), also doesn't use cookies, and is also [open
source](https://github.com/readthedocs/ethical-ad-server/). I made a total of
$442.27 from EthicalAds for over 200,000 views over the course of a year (about
$36.86 per month). That's about $2 in revenue per thousand views.

![EthicalAds dashboard](https://i.imgur.com/FGukMy1.jpg)

There was also a two year period where I [uninstalled
ads](https://github.com/dguo/make-a-readme/pull/31/files) because
[ReadMe](https://readme.com/) (documentation as a service) sponsored the
website. I have [Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/) to thank for that.
I saw [a post](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23438930) asking about side
projects that are making money. I
[commented](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23443428) about Make a README
and got a reply from [Gregory Koberger](https://gkoberger.com/), the founder of
ReadMe:

> Ah, my SEO nemesis!
>
> Really, though, your site is awesome. I just emailed you about sponsoring it,
> if you're interested :)

I laughed out loud when I read that because I had noticed that Make a README
would sometimes show up in search results ahead of ReadMe, so I could guess who
the commenter was even before I saw the username and profile.

It was an easy decision to take the sponsorship offer because I was already a
fan of ReadMe. I've done plenty of third party integrations at work, and when I
open a company's documentation page for the first time, I can immediately
recognize if they are using ReadMe. That's a positive sign for me that the
documentation will be pretty comprehensive and useful, relative to documentation
by companies that build their own systems from scratch.

Lastly, I've received two acquistion offers (four digits each) to buy the
website. I turned them down because it's more gratifying to keep the website as
a side project. I never intended to make any money off of this anyway. Though it
has been nice to earn a bit of largely passive income from the advertising and
sponsorship.

## Gratification

Way more than money, the biggest source of gratification is just learning when
people find the site to be useful. I have a monitor set up with
[F5Bot](https://f5bot.com/). It checks Reddit, Hacker News, and
[Lobsters](https://lobste.rs/) for mentions of "makeareadme" and sends me an
email when it finds something. I also occasionally [search
Twitter](https://twitter.com/search?q=makeareadme.com) for "makeareadme.com".

I've been in the programming world long enough that making a README is second
nature. It can be hard for me to remember that at one point, I didn't know the
value of good documentation and what information is useful in a README. It's the
[curse of knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_knowledge) at work.
So when someone recommends Make a README to other people, it reminds me that
everyone is a beginner at some point. And that for this one basic but important
thing, my website served as a helpful resource. That feels *so good* every time.

## Future Work

In the future, I'd like to add two things to the website. The first is
translations. The [analytics](https://plausible.io/makeareadme.com/countries)
show that significant traffic comes from countries that don't primarily speak
English. Adding translations would make the website more accessible to more
people.

I also want to add an interactive README generator. I think the current
template is a good educational starting point, but the website could be more
useful for experienced engineers who don't need the educational aspect but are
making new READMEs.
