---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - hardware
date: "2025-01-25"
tags:
  - air
unlisted: true
title: My Indoor Air Quality Setup
---
import YouTube from "../../components/youtube.astro";

I first became interested in [indoor air
quality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indoor_air_quality) when I saw a
[post](https://x.com/dhh/status/1234533598583091200) by [David Heinemeier
Hansson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Heinemeier_Hansson) saying that
his company, [Basecamp](https://basecamp.com/), gives every employee an air
quality monitor. I watched a talk that he gave:

<YouTube id="MRqh8oLY7Ik" />

And it resonated with me. Air is another input into your body, just like food
and water. It seems obvious that what you eat and drink has a huge effect on
your health, but I had never really thought that much about the air around me.
Which is of course a sign of privilege considering many cities [deal with
persistent air pollution](https://www.iqair.com/us/world-air-quality-ranking).

Since then, I've collected an assortment of air quality appliances. When people
visit for the first time and inevitably ask what each one does, I feel like Mr.
Monk:

<YouTube id="Sv0O6b65o3U" />

Though I've never actually ran my humidifer and dehumidifier simultaneously.

This post describes my setup so that I [have something to link
to](https://www.dannyguo.com/blog/why-i-blog#be-able-to-provide-a-link) the
next time someone is interested.

## Monitoring

On Hansson's recommendation, I bought an [Awair
Element](https://amzn.to/3BRqG1V) to monitor my air quality. I particuarly
liked that Awair has an [official API](https://docs.developer.getawair.com/).

The device measures the five main factors for air quality: temperature,
humidity, carbon dioxide,
[VOCs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volatile_organic_compound) (volatile
organic compounds), and PM2.5 (particulate matter that is 2.5 micrometers or
less in diameter). I mentally group the last two together as "pollutants."

## Temperature

Everyone is already familiar with indoor heating and air conditioning, but I
still have a few things to mention regarding temperature control.

### Radiant Heat

The first is the existence of [radiant heating
systems](https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/radiant-heating). In my previous
apartment, the place was equipped with a hydronic radiant floor. I didn't know
this existed, but I instantly fell in love with it when winter arrived.

Basically, the floor has pipes running through it, and a boiler heats water to
pump through the pipes. It makes the entire floor pleasantly warm, which is
particularly nice in the bathroom. And unlike with [forced-air
heating](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forced-air), the air doesn't become dry.
If I ever buy or build a home, I would strongly consider installing a radiant
heating system.

### Automation

The flip side to a fantastic heating system is that my previous apartment
didn't have built-in air conditioning of any kind. So I relied on window units
for the summer. In my bedroom, the thermostat on the air conditioner didn't
work well, so I [automated turning the unit on and
off](https://www.dannyguo.com/blog/automating-my-air-conditioner). My setup
used the Awair API to retrieve the temperature and then toggled a smart plug to
keep the temperature within a narrow range at night.

I recently had to do the same thing with a heater in a nursery. A [common issue
in New York City
buildings](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/nov/06/steam-heating-environment-america-new-york-city-history)
is that they have steam-based heating systems that are either on or off, with
no fine-grained control. So a room can easily get too hot, with the most
obvious solution being to open the window, as wasteful as that sounds.

I can deal with that in my own room, but for a baby, it was becoming too much
of a problem for the room to alternate between being in the low 60s and the
high 80s. I first tried an [oil-filled space heater](https://amzn.to/4jxDFqv)
with a thermostat. But just like with my old air conditioner, the thermostat
was ineffective. I suppose it's difficult to make an effective thermostat
that's built-in to the unit, since it can only measure the temperature right
next to the unit.

I considered buying a [Vornadobaby Sensa](https://amzn.to/4ayZ6DB) space
heater, which solves that problem using a separate, wireless sensor for the
heater to adjust its output. But I had already dealt with this problem before
with the window air conditioner, so I knew I could replicate the solution.

However, the space heater that I already had was too fancy. Because it was
digital, I couldn't turn it on and off just by using a smart plug. It required
a button press to turn on. So I returned it and bought a [cheaper unit with
analog controls](https://amzn.to/3PP6EIM). I turned off the building's heat in
the nursery, flipped the logic in my code since now I was controlling a heater
instead of an air conditioner, and once again experienced the satisfaction of a
stable temperature.

As a safety measure, I also put a [thermometer with an audible
alarm](https://amzn.to/4jKUDSD) in the room in case the system fails, and the
temperature gets too cold or too hot.

### Eight Sleep

Lastly, I've had sleeping issues before and eventually tried out an [Eight
Sleep](https://www.eightsleep.com/) system ([here is a referral
link](https://refer.eight.sl/b8psaz88) for a discount). It's a bed cover that,
similar to radiant heating, uses water running through tubes to heat or cool
the bed. So you can set the temperature of your bed, and you can even set each
half of the bed to a different temperature if two people have different
preferences.

It wasn't quite a miracle worker, but I tend to sleep hot, and it has been nice
to be able to fix that in a very precise way. So I've been happy with my
purchase, though I have also been lucky enough to avoid leaking issues that
[seem to have been fairly
common](https://www.reddit.com/r/EightSleep/search/?q=leak), at least in
previous generations of the product.

## Humidity

I learned that in addition to making me just feel uncomfortable, both high and
low levels of humidity can have negative health effects, especially in terms of
respiratory issues. I've seen varying numbers for ideal indoor humidity, but
the consensus seems to be around 30-50%.

So in the summer, I use a [Frigidaire 50 pint
dehumidifier](https://amzn.to/40NPtOc). On humid days, I would empty it about
once a day. It astonished me to see how much water it was pulling out of the
air.

In the winter, I switch to using an [AIRCARE
humidifier](https://amzn.to/49WaGrX). In the past, I've used the typical
ultrasonic humdifiers that spray a cool mist into the air. But I learned that
these can be bad for air quality by putting particulate matter and bacteria
into the air. For a while, I tried to be diligent and bought gallons of
distilled water to use. But even with a [supposedly large
humidifier](https://amzn.to/42o8ZC1), I'd have to refill it multiple times a
day to try to keep the humidity around 45%.

Then I learned about evaporative humidifiers. This video provides a fantastic
explanation ([Technology
Connections](https://www.youtube.com/@TechnologyConnections) is an incredible
channel in general):

<YouTube id="oHeehYYgl28" />

The gist is that an evaporative humidifer is simple but effective. It's
basically a tank of water, with a wick that soaks up the water and has a lot of
surface area, and a fan that drys out the wick to humidify the air. It's like a
more efficient form of leaving a wet towel out to dry.

Because it's just evaporating water, any unwanted things in that water just
stay in the humidifier. Yes, that means bacteria can grow in the water, but
that is also true for ultrasonic humidifiers, and at least the bacteria isn't
going into the air. I also control the growth by adding a [bacteriostatic
treatment](https://amzn.to/40Ym585).

With the AIRCARE humidifer, the tank is so large that I only have to refill it
once a day at most, and I can use plain tap water without worrying.

## CO<sub>2</sub>

High CO<sub>2</sub> levels [impair
cognition](https://www.colorado.edu/mechanical/2020/04/21/continued-co2-emissions-will-impair-cognition).
As far as I've
[researched](https://www.reddit.com/r/chemistry/comments/iqw6hf/cost_effective_co2_scrubber/),
there's no practical appliance for decreasing CO<sub>2</sub>. Though this
[Hacker News thread](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=40696110) has a
[comment](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=40696500) suggesting something
called an [energy recovery
ventilator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_recovery_ventilation) that I
need to look into more.

When it builds up, the best thing most people can do is to somehow notice it
(either by feeling the effects or preemptively with a monitor) and get fresh
air by opening a window or otherwise improving ventilation.

I've heard the idea of using plants to try to reduce indoor CO<sub>2</sub>, but
my understanding is that this is [effectively a
myth](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11253968/).

## Pollution

For purifying air, I use a [Coway Airmega 400](https://amzn.to/4gWqQnM) in the
living room and [smaller Coway units](https://amzn.to/3PeujSz) for bedrooms.
Here is a demo that partially convinced me to go with this brand:

<YouTube id="q2yHERLA79w" />

I could also verify that the purifier makes a difference because when my Awair
monitor tells me that VOC or PM2.5 levels are high, the purifier would
frequently detect the same thing and go to a faster speed. This was
particularly noticeable while cooking, a [subtle source of indoor air
pollution](https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20200909-why-indoor-air-pollution-is-an-overlooked-problem).

And during the [2023 Canadian
wildfires](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2023_Canadian_wildfires), the air
purifiers did their job in keeping the air inside clean, even when the outside
air became visibly polluted.

When I changed the filter, it was gratifying to see the pollution that it kept
out of the air my family breathes:

![Clean Coway air filter next to a dirty one](https://i.imgur.com/sY57WNo.jpg)

### Cars

If you have a car, I also recommend [changing your cabin air
filter](https://www.cars.com/articles/whats-a-cabin-air-filter-and-when-should-you-replace-it-1420668943312/).
I didn't know this was a part of routine car maintenance. When I finally
learned about it and changed mine, the old one was filthy, just like the Coway
filter:

![Clean cabin air filter next to a dirty one](https://i.imgur.com/FN2f7Lu.jpg)

It was cheap and easy enought to [buy a generic one on
Amazon](https://amzn.to/3CmijMa) that was compatible with my car and change it
myself rather than going to an auto shop to do it.

## Conclusion

Yes, writing this all out does make me realize how much of a control freak I
am. But I sleep better knowing that the air in my place is less likely to
insidiously cause health issues for my family. And of course, I also sleep
better when I am hot or cold in my bed and can use the Eight Sleep app to
change the temperature at will.

But I still dream of a place that has a [heat pump
system](https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/heat-pump-systems), in conjunction
with a [whole home
humdifier](https://indoortemp.com/resources/whole-house-humidifiers-benefits-types-costs),
powered by a solar roof. There's always a better setup to strive for!
