---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - hardware
date: "2024-03-25"
tags:
  - peloton
title: My Peloton Desk Setup
---

I have a desk setup for my [Peloton](https://www.onepeloton.com) bike so that I
can do other things while riding. Here's what it looks like.

![Peloton desk setup](https://i.imgur.com/B5YLapA.jpg)

This started when a coworker recommended a tray that is designed to fit in the
bike's handle. The tray is good enough to be a functional desk on its own, but
I've added a laptop stand, mouse, and keyboard to make the setup more
comfortable and avoid hunching over.

I've used it while working, writing, and reading, and I've even done 1-on-1
meetings while riding. But I never take an actual Peloton class with this setup.
I do a "Just Ride," so there's nothing playing on the Peloton screen, and I ride
at whatever leisurely pace my subconscious decides. This means I'm never out of
breath. I also don't bother with clipping in the regular cleats for these rides.
I use a pair of slip-on shoes instead to make it easier to get on and off the
bike.

This setup helps me get a little more exercise in, it gives me an energy boost
while I'm doing other things, and it can make me feel like I'm thinking better.
It's like how going for a walk can be a way to generate good thoughts. Of
course, using a Peloton bike isn't the only way to do this. There are many
options for
[treadmills](https://www.amazon.com/s?k=desk+treadmill&crid=1PMY8FJ0RBT0M&sprefix=desk+treadmill%2Caps%2C91&linkCode=ll2&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=6b114c9cd46971714024afd49ea29c5e&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl)
and
[bikes](https://www.amazon.com/s?k=desk+bike&crid=32US6LQ8JXO9S&sprefix=desk+bike%2Caps%2C82&linkCode=ll2&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=6a2708c284df95020ab99e6a495ab352&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl)
that are designed to be used with desks. [Stephen
Wolfram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Wolfram) wrote about his
[treadmill desk](https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2019/02/seeking-the-productive-life-some-details-of-my-personal-infrastructure/).

I've been happy with my setup, though it does take me a minute to switch
between desk mode and regular riding mode.

# Tray

The tray is a [TFD Tray+
Sidewinder](https://www.amazon.com/TFD-Sidewinder-Compatible-Designed-Materials/dp/B09RP6K9G8?keywords=peloton%2Bsidewinder&qid=1687022893&sr=8-2&ufe=app_do%3Aamzn1.fos.18ed3cb5-28d5-4975-8bc7-93deae8f9840&th=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=e51b290e4dc57e3943883ae8825f2f1d&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl).
It easily slides into the handlebars, and it feels secure. The original Tray is
for original model Peloton bikes, while the Tray+ is for the Bike+. I got the
Sidewinder variation because it's wider, and I wanted more space for a mouse and
keyboard.

# Stand

The laptop stand is a [Rottay
stand](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B09PQTF49G?ie=UTF8&th=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=6c979fa71bdfa2f3100c140d54559ac3&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl).
I picked this one because it allows adjusting both the height and the angle. The
height can go up to 16 inches, which is higher than most of the options that I
considered. For ergonomics, I wanted to be able to get the top of my laptop
screen to near eye level.

# Keyboard

The keyboard is a [Epomaker
NT68](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B09KNRKZ74?ie=UTF8&th=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=03ef1271afae74f7462762c4ab2dbe83&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl).
Any wireless keyboard would work, but I picked this one because it has
mechanical switches, it can connect over Bluetooth, it's easy to switch
connections between my personal and work laptops, and it charges over USB-C.

It's also one of the few keyboards that matches the Mac keyboard layout, with
four modifier keys in the bottom left corner. So my muscle memory doesn't break
when I switch from a MacBook keyboard. It also means I don't have to curl my
thumb in as much to hit the Command key.

# Mouse

The mouse is a [Logitech MX Ergo
Plus](https://www.amazon.com/Logitech-MX-ERGO-Wireless-Trackball/dp/B0768M8B5J?crid=2DI5ME30NR08&keywords=mx+ergo&qid=1687022549&sprefix=mx+ergo%2Caps%2C166&sr=8-3&ufe=app_do%3Aamzn1.fos.18ed3cb5-28d5-4975-8bc7-93deae8f9840&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=1ed14c1194590b4d23b30caf07c70808&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl).
I chose it because it's a trackball mouse, so I don't have to move the mouse
itself around, which saves space. It also means that I don't need to worry about
the mouse being able to track on the tray's transparent surface. A mouse pad
would solve that problem, but it'd be another thing to move in a setup that I
frequently install and remove.

Note that there's also a [regular MX
Ergo](https://www.amazon.com/Logitech-Ergo-Wireless-Trackball-Mouse/dp/B0753P1GTS?crid=2DI5ME30NR08&keywords=mx+ergo&qid=1687022626&sprefix=mx+ergo%2Caps%2C166&sr=8-1&ufe=app_do%3Aamzn1.fos.18ed3cb5-28d5-4975-8bc7-93deae8f9840&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=0894288ea0db62545b92a55dbd8f81b2&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl).
The only difference is that the Plus comes with an extra wedge to angle the
mouse 10 degrees more vertically, [reducing
pronation](https://www.ergopedia.ca/risk_factors/Pronation_or_Working_with_the_Hands_Flat_on_the_Worksurface.html).

I do wish this mouse charged over USB-C instead of micro USB, that it had
on-board memory so that I don't have to keep running Logitech software to remap
buttons, and that it had more buttons to begin with. But there just there aren't
many trackball mice to choose from.

# Cup

You might have also noticed a metal cup in the picture. It's a [Real Deal Steel
cup](https://www.amazon.com/Real-Deal-Steel-Slim-Stack-Insulated/dp/B07D272N6B?th=1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=70ee46719ce3917c8879a105cfe3cd44&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl).
I love this cup because it has vacuum insulation that can keep ice water cold
for hours. And because It's metal, it won't shatter if it drops to the
ground. That hasn't happened yet, but it's a risk with my Peloton setup.
