---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - learning
date: "2025-09-20"
unlisted: true
title: Peak Indignation
---

My earliest memory of feeling indignant was in elementary school. My first grade
teacher had a board with images of three mountain peaks: short, medium, and
tall. The board also had images of bears labeled with each student’s name. Every
morning, my teacher would move the bears to “base camp,” before any of the
peaks. Then throughout the morning, she would move people up to each successive
mountain peak if they did something good. If you made it to the last peak by
noon, you’d get a prize: you’d get to pick someone to eat lunch with 1 on 1, and
you’d both get special food.

This was remarkably effective at getting us to do what my teacher wanted. The
typical way to get to the first peak was to settle down quickly when class got
started. Chit chat ended in no time when climbing mountain peaks was at stake!

And there wasn’t that much time between then and lunch, so it was hard to make
it to the final peak. I only made it a handful of times, despite striving for it
everyday. Yet there was a girl who made it to the end multiple times a week. I
couldn’t figure it out. I felt like I did more good things than she did, but my
teacher just didn’t notice or acknowledge me as often. I wouldn’t have known
what the word injustice meant back then, but I certainly felt it.

Years later, I finally understood. My classmate had immigrated from Japan to my
small town, which wasn’t particularly diverse. She was the only Japanese person
in my class. And most people in my class had grown up together and knew each
even before we started elementary school. Her English also wasn’t the best yet.

My teacher was just trying to help her make friends.

This was another one of my [formative
realizations](https://www.dannyguo.com/blog/my-seatbelt-rule-for-judgment). In a
strict sense, what my teacher did *was* technically unfair. But I didn’t mind
anymore. There was an ulterior motive that I could get behind. My feeling of
indignation melted into a feeling of shame over my younger self’s pettiness. I
grew up a little bit more.
