---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - programming
date: "2020-05-16"
tags:
  - optimization
  - webdev
title: Serve Videos Instead of GIFs
---
import Video from "../../components/video.astro";

The Graphics Interchange Format ([GIF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GIF)) is
over 30 years old but is a pervasive part of internet culture. We use GIFs to
serve short, silent, and looping videos, which frequently become
[memes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_meme). [Entire
services](https://giphy.com/) exist to create and share them, and many
smartphone keyboards have built-in GIF support.

It's also easy to embed them into websites with simple
[image](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/img) tags. Yet
GIFs have a significant drawback: massive file sizes. A single GIF can be larger
than a typical website ([over 2
MB](https://www.keycdn.com/support/the-growth-of-web-page-size)).

<Video imgurId="iGkFsvW" />

## GIFs

> I don't care what anything was *designed* to do. I care about what it *can* do.
>
> -- [Gene Kranz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gene_Kranz) in [Apollo
13](https://youtu.be/XLMDSjCzEx8)

GIFs [were never
designed](https://www.wired.com/2017/05/gif-turns-30-ancient-format-changed-internet/)
to serve full videos. Almost to the contrary, [Steve
Wilhite](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Wilhite) designed the format to
solve the problem of efficiently serving simple images, like weather maps and
other graphics.

Each image in a GIF is limited to a color pallete of 256 colors. Images are also
[losslessly compressed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lossless_compression)
using [LZW](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lempel%E2%80%93Ziv%E2%80%93Welch).
These factors made GIF a good choice for graphics rather than images like
photographs, which have much more detail and are better suited for a format like
[JPEG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JPEG).

GIF also allowed for storing more than one image in a file. This fact made it
easy for a new GIF specification (GIF89a) to add the option for time delays
between images, turning them into frames of an animation.

The specification also allows for a space called the application extension
block. [Netscape Navigator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netscape_Navigator)
v2.0 used this space to allow GIF creators to specify that a GIF should loop a
certain number of times or indefinitely. This gave us the GIF as we commonly see
it today.

However, GIFs tend to be several megabytes in size now because we frequently use
them to display videos comprised of images with a lot of detail. Remember that
each one is losslessly compressed. Furthermore, GIF doesn't do any compression
between frames, a basic foundation of typical [video
compression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_compression#Video) techniques.
Frames of a video tend to be fairly similar. Because GIFs don't exploit this
information redundancy, the format is a very inefficient way to serve videos.

The solution is to use a format that's actually designed to serve videos, like
[MP4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MPEG-4_Part_14) or
[WebM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebM). Many services do this transparently.
When Twitter [added GIF
support](https://techcrunch.com/2014/06/19/gasp-twitter-gifs-arent-actually-gifs/)
in 2014, they implemented the feature by converting uploaded GIFs into videos to
serve instead. Imgur [started doing the same
thing](https://blog.imgur.com//2014/10/09/introducing-gifv/) the same year.

## Serving Videos

Serving videos instead of GIFs is easy to do now with the HTML [video
element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/video), which
is supported [almost universally](https://caniuse.com/#feat=video), but it does
take more work to use a video tag rather than an image tag. To serve the video
equivalent of a GIF, we can use markup like this:

```html
<video autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="dancing-baby.webm" type="video/webm">
    <source src="dancing-baby.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    <p>Your browser doesn't support this embedded video.</p>
</video>
```

Using the `autoplay`, `loop`, and `muted` attributes gives us the same behavior
that we expect from a GIF.

The `playsinline` attribute is necessary for [iOS in
particular](https://webkit.org/blog/6784/new-video-policies-for-ios/). See this
[Stack Overflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/48493032/1481479).

The element will load the [first
source](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Multimedia_and_embedding/Video_and_audio_content#Media_file_support_in_browsers)
that the browser supports. In this case, if the browser can't play WebM videos,
it will try to play the MP4 version instead.

We also provide a fallback message in case the browser doesn't support the video
element. This is distinct from the case where the browser doesn't support any of
the sources. In that case, the element fires an error event.

We don't have to provide the [MIME
type](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/MIME_types)
for each source, but doing so might allow the browser to [save a network
request](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/source#Attributes).
If it can't handle the type, it can move on to the next source rather than
making a request to the server.

Video behavior can also be affected by the user's power settings. For example,
videos won't autoplay on iOS if the user has [low power
mode](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT205234) on. Instead, the user should see
the controls and can manually play the video.

While serving a video is not as straightforward as serving a GIF, the file size
savings can be tremendous. The following video is 103 KB in size, compared to
4.1 MB for the GIF that I converted it from. That's a size reduction of over
97%.

<Video imgurId="VQMB3VR" />

## Creating Videos

To quickly convert a GIF into a video, there are plenty of websites that let you
[do a one-off conversion](https://cloudconvert.com/gif-to-mp4).

To convert a GIF into a video file on the command line, I use
[FFmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org/).

```sh
ffmpeg -f gif -i dancing-baby.gif dancing-baby.mp4
```

To take video screenshots in macOS, I use [Kap](https://getkap.co/). It supports
saving the videos as GIF, MP4, WebM, or
[APNG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APNG) files.
[QuickTime](https://support.apple.com/quicktime) also [supports screen
recordings](https://support.apple.com/guide/quicktime-player/record-your-screen-qtp97b08e666/mac).

If you use [Imgur](https://imgur.com/), one issue that I've experienced is poor
video quality after uploading MP4s. The reason seems to be that [they get
recompressed](https://community.imgur.com/t/videos-losing-quality-on-upload/62258).
So at least for Imgur, it's better to upload a GIF and let them take care of
converting it into a video.

One final note: [according to
Wilhite](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CBtKxsuGvko), GIF [is
pronounced](https://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/05/23/battle-over-gif-pronunciation-erupts/)
with a soft "G," like "jif." That settles the [never-ending
debate](https://www.mentalfloss.com/article/551894/how-do-linguists-pronounce-gif)
for me.
