---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - mental-models
date: "2023-06-24"
unlisted: true
tags:
  -
title: Thinking in Binaries, Spectrums, and Dimensions
---

In college, I remember walking with a friend. I don't recall the context or his
exact wording, but he told me that he didn't like it when people reduce others
to single attributes, turning them into caricatures of themselves. A real life
version of [Flanderization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flanderization). That
thought has stuck with me.

Years later, I was considering what was most striking about the smartest people
I've met. My conclusion was that they tend to avoid thinking in binaries.
Instead, their thinking frequently involves spectrums and even multiple
dimensions. This means doing the opposite of what my friend talked about. It
means putting in the effort to acknowledge complexity and nuance.

## Thinking in Binaries

Thinking in binaries means seeing the world in black and white. It means judging
people as simply "good" or "bad." These labels are simplistic and to the point.
Sometimes it's not worth thinking any more deeply than that, or we don't have
the time to do so. But we should try to recognize when we are taking the
shortcut. When we are rushing to a conclusion that may be unfair or unuseful.

One method to break out of binary thinking is to incorporate numbers. That
naturally forces us to recognize that a spectrum exists. Saying that someone can
run 100 meters in 11 seconds is much more descriptive than saying that someone
is a fast runner.

Even if it's not easy to involve numbers, we can still strive to provide
specific examples. This is related to the idea of ["show, don't
tell."](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Show,_don%27t_tell) "She is smart" is
vague and unconvincing. "She taught herself calculus in middle school" is much
more interesting. Specificity cuts through bullshit.

## Thinking in Spectrums

Thinking in spectrums means recognizing that many situations are matters of
degrees rather than a simple yes or no. It means making mental room for
limitless shades of gray.

But even that can still be too simple. Spectrums can be conditional on other
factors, which can themselves be spectrums. As I've gotten older, I've found
myself saying "it depends" more frequently.

## Thinking in Dimensions

Thinking in dimensions means considering all the factors that are relevant to a
given situation, even if the interaction between these factors can be difficult
to untangle and even if it means we have to collect or think about more
information.

So we have three progressively higher levels of thinking.

1. Thinking in binaries: Bob is a slow worker.
2. Thinking in spectrums: Bob takes 20% longer on average than his teammates to
   complete tasks.
3. Thinking in dimensions: Bob is sometimes just as fast as his teammates, but
   he is 70% slower when he is hungry.

The higher we get, the better we understand a given situation.

## Caveats

But I empathize with the urge to simplify and think about things in a binary
manner. It's less effort, and humans are lazy. Thinking at a higher level isn't
necessarily a good thing. An alphorism in statistics is that ["All models are
wrong, but some are
useful."](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All_models_are_wrong)

A simple thought can be more useful than a complex one in the right context,
such as when you don't have the luxury of time for deliberation. If someone is
rushing at you with a knife, you should probably go ahead and make the split
second call that the person is a danger to you and not bother quantifying just
how dangerous they are.

This is similar to [Daniel
Kahneman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Kahneman)'s distinction between
System 1 (fast and instinctive) and System 2 (slow and logical) thinking in
[Thinking, Fast and
Slow](https://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Fast-Slow-Daniel-Kahneman/dp/0374533555?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1687663967&sr=8-1&linkCode=ll1&tag=thdalo00-20&linkId=f4149f191d7c0990fb08e0d68a59b874&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl).

## Conclusion

I imagine this might seem trivial to many people. But I've found it easier to
recognize these levels of thinking in the real world after giving them explicit
names.

And thinking about this reminds me to try to be more like the smart people that
I admire. Wanting to think more deeply is different from actually doing it. For
me, it's an ideal to constantly strive for.

Binary and even spectrum thinking can simplify things too much. A part of
growing up is learning that almost everything is far more complex than it might
seem at first. Thinking in dimensions helps us get closer to true understanding.
