---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPostLayout.astro
categories:
  - programming
date: "2018-12-07"
lastmod: "2020-02-18"
tags:
  - email
  - tutorial
title: Using Mailgun for a Free Custom Domain Email Address
---
import Warning from "../../components/warning.astro";

<Warning>
This method is no longer viable. Mailgun has <a
href="https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=22192543">updated</a> their <a
href="https://www.mailgun.com/pricing/">pricing</a> options, and the free plan
no longer includes receiving email. Check out <a
href="https://www.zoho.com/mail/zohomail-pricing.html">Zoho Mail's free plan</a>
for an option that is still free, but keep in mind that it only allows web
access. A paid but affordable alternative is <a
href="https://www.namecheap.com/hosting/email/">Namecheap's email hosting</a>.
Personally, I plan on switching to <a
href="https://www.fastmail.com/">Fastmail</a> because I'm going to make my
custom domain email address my primary email address, so I want a full-featured
service.
</Warning>

I've been using [Gmail](https://www.google.com/gmail/about/) for my primary
email address for over 13 years. I should thank my sister for making me use my
name and not my now embarrassing
[AIM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AIM_(software)) username. Here's a look at
the welcome email back in 2005. Gmail wasn't even a year old yet.

![Gmail welcome email in 2005](https://i.imgur.com/VRHg6jX.png)

Gmail has served me well since then, but mostly for fun (and partly because of [
vanity](https://theoatmeal.com/comics/email_address)), I recently set up an
email address on [my own domain](https://dannyguo.com). I ended up going with a
free solution that involves [Mailgun](https://www.mailgun.com/) and is good
enough for my purposes. I wanted to still use my Gmail account to actually
receive and send the custom domain emails. It isn't important to me right now to
actually have a separate inbox or to stop using Google for email.

## Options

Several years ago, a common choice was Google Apps (now known as [G
Suite](https://gsuite.google.com/)) because it was free for up to five users.  G
Suite [got rid](https://support.google.com/a/answer/2855120) of the free edition
and [costs](https://gsuite.google.com/pricing.html) $5 per month now, so I
investigated alternatives.

I've read about [Zoho Mail](https://www.zoho.com/mail/) as a free alternative.
Unfortunately, it stopped offering
[POP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post_Office_Protocol) and
[IMAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Message_Access_Protocol) access
for its free plan [earlier this
year](https://help.zoho.com/portal/community/topic/zoho-free-tier-pop-imap-activesync-no-longer-free),
so the only way to access my email would be through Zoho's website or apps. It
would [cost](https://www.zoho.com/workplace/pricing.html) $3 per month to add
POP and IMAP support. I don't fault Zoho for making this change, but I would
prefer to access all my email through my Gmail account. I have also read some
anecdotes that Zoho Mail can be slow in sending and receiving emails.

Next, I looked at [FastMail](https://www.fastmail.com/) and [Proton
Mail](https://proton.me/mail), which are frequently cited by people who have
chosen to [avoid Google services](https://nomoregoogle.com/). FastMail
[costs](https://www.fastmail.com/pricing/) $5 per month or $50 per year for a
plan that includes custom domain support. Proton Mail [requires a paid
plan](https://proton.me/support/custom-domain) for the feature, and the cheapest
[paid plan](https://proton.me/pricing) is $5 per month or $48 per year.

Another option was to use [Google Domains](https://domains.google/). It includes
a free [email forwarding
feature](https://support.google.com/domains/answer/3251241) that allows for
sending an email from the alias as well. However, the feature is only available
when you [use Google's name
servers](https://support.google.com/domains/answer/3251241). My site runs on
[Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/), and I use their [DNS
service](https://www.netlify.com/docs/dns/).

I also looked at mailboxes from other domain registrars.
[Gandi](https://www.gandi.net) includes [two
mailboxes](https://www.gandi.net/en/domain/email) with every domain, but Gandi's
domain prices also [seem more expensive](https://tld-list.com/) than elsewhere,
especially when considering that [Cloudflare](https://www.cloudflare.com/)'s
[at-cost domain registrar
service](https://blog.cloudflare.com/cloudflare-registrar/) is scheduled to be
available soon.

[Namecheap](https://www.namecheap.com) has very affordable [email
hosting](https://www.namecheap.com/hosting/email.aspx) that only costs $9.88 a
year. I was ready to set it up when I stumbled upon one last solution, deep in
search results for "custom domain email." Some people use
[Mailgun](https://www.mailgun.com/).

## Mailgun

Essentially, incoming emails go to Mailgun. With a routing rule, I can forward
those emails to my Gmail, and with some additional configuration, I can also send
emails from my Gmail but have them appear as if they are sent from my custom
domain.

Mailgun's [free tier](https://www.mailgun.com/pricing) is way more than enough.
It allows for 10,000 emails per month. That includes both incoming and outgoing
emails, but for a personal email account, I'll never even come close to that
limit.  Even if I do manage to go over, it only costs $0.50 for every additional
thousand emails.

The plan does restrict you from sending to email addresses that you haven't
explicitly added to an "authorized recipients" list. However, Mailgun lifts this
restriction if you provide a payment method, which puts you on the "concept"
[plan](https://help.mailgun.com/hc/en-us/articles/203068914-What-are-the-differences-between-the-free-and-concept-plans-).
I was happy to do so.

Do note that Mailgun [does not officially
recommend](https://help.mailgun.com/hc/en-us/articles/203306710-Can-I-use-Mailgun-for-my-personal-email-address-)
using the service for personal email, but they do not forbid it. They recommend
using hosted email services like G Suite instead, which I would definitely do
for something like a business.

### Instructions

Here are the step by step instructions. Note that Mailgun has distinct [support
for the European Union
region](https://www.mailgun.com/blog/we-have-a-new-region-in-europe-yall/). All
of the links in this guide are for the United States region, so if you are in
the EU, make sure to stay in one region in the Mailgun dashboard (especially
when you create a new route) so that you don't run into problems receiving email
on your custom domain. Thanks to [Kuj](https://disqus.com/by/disqus_WIcggqRDL9/)
for informing me of this issue in the comments.

[Sign up](https://signup.mailgun.com/) for a Mailgun account, and provide a
 payment method unless you're okay with the sending restriction.

![Mailgun's payment info form](https://i.imgur.com/iF4KJKP.png)

Go the "[Domains](https://app.mailgun.com/app/domains)" tab to [add a new
domain](https://app.mailgun.com/app/domains/new). The page recommends using a
subdomain, like "mail.yourdomain.com" instead of just "yourdomain.com". The
reason for this recommendation is that in general, you don't want to risk
hurting your root domain's [email sender
reputation](https://www.sparkpost.com/resources/email-explained/email-sender-reputation/).
Companies will sometimes [use different domains or
subdomains](https://help.mailgun.com/hc/en-us/articles/202256730-How-do-I-pick-a-domain-name-for-my-Mailgun-account-)
for sending transactional versus marketing emails.

For the purpose of a personal email address, use the root domain if you want to
receive email there (ben@yourdomain.com) rather than at a subdomain
(ben@mail.yourdomain.com). The risk of harming your sender reputation is much
lower because you presumably aren't going to use your personal email to email
tons of strangers.

![Mailgun's add domain page](https://i.imgur.com/Nnkx9eP.png)

Next, go to wherever you manage your website's DNS settings (like your domain
registrar) and add the DNS records provided by Mailgun. The [MX
records](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MX_record) are for setting Mailgun's
servers as the recipient for emails. The [TXT
records](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TXT_record) are for setting up
[SPF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sender_Policy_Framework) and
[DKIM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DomainKeys_Identified_Mail), which are two
ways for recipients to verify an email's authenticity. You don't need to add the
[CNAME record](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CNAME_record) unless you want to
track what your recipients do with your emails, like opening them and clicking
links inside them.

It might take a while for the DNS changes to propogate, though mine only took
about a minute. Tell Mailgun to check the DNS records. Once they are verified,
you can go to the "[Routes](https://app.mailgun.com/app/routes)" tab to
[create](https://app.mailgun.com/app/routes/new) a [routing
rule](https://mailgun-documentation.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-routes.html#routes).

Change the expression type to "Match Recipient," and set the custom domain
address that you want to use. Then check the "Forward" action, and set the
address where you actually want to receive the emails (like a Gmail account).
You could set up more sophisticated rules, or even add additional addresses that
all forward to the same email address.

![Mailgun's create route page](https://i.imgur.com/k39ZI2e.png)

At this point, receiving emails should work. Go ahead, and try it out. I also
created a [Gmail label](https://support.google.com/mail/answer/118708), and set
up a [filter](https://support.google.com/mail/answer/6579) so that all emails
from my custom domain get tagged with it, making it easy for me to view only
those emails if I want to.

To make sending work, you'll need some additional information from Mailgun. Go
back to the domains tab, and open your domain. You'll need the values for "SMTP
Hostname," "Default SMTP Login," and "Default Password."

![Mailgun's domain information page](https://i.imgur.com/DlcFo5y.png)

Go to Gmail settings, and open the "Accounts and Import" tab. In the "Send mail
as" section, add the custom domain email address. I unchecked the "Treat as an
alias" option because I want to automatically reply with whichever address is
the intended recipient. I don't want to have to manually change the sender.
Normally, [unchecking the option](https://support.google.com/a/answer/1710338)
means that emails sent to the other address won't show up in Gmail, but in this
case, Mailgun is handling that part.

![Gmail's add email address popup](https://i.imgur.com/oRGTT8R.png)

Go to the next step, and fill in the info from Mailgun. The Mailgun "SMTP
Hostname" corresponds to the Gmail "SMTP Server" field, and the "Default SMTP
Login"" corresponds to the "Username" field. Leave the SMTP port as 587, and
make sure to fill in the password.

![Gmail's SMTP info popup](https://i.imgur.com/kDjArk5.png)

Press the "Add Account" button, and you should get a confirmation email
from Gmail that contains a link you can use to verify the request. At this
point, sending emails should work too! When you compose an email, you can click
on the "From" field to change who you are sending as.

Try it out. Your recipient should receive the email, and the email details
should have both the "mailed-by" and "signed-by" fields set to your custom
domain. From their perspective, they don't know that you actually used Gmail to
send the email.

![Gmail email details](https://i.imgur.com/zLYaRvL.png)

One last thing you can do is to set a monthly sending limit with your Mailgun
account. The option is in your [account
settings](https://app.mailgun.com/app/account/settings). Look for the "Custom
Message Limit" field. Just in case someone manages to get access to your Gmail
and tries to use your custom domain address to send email, Mailgun will stop
processing emails once the limit is hit.

### Conclusion

If Mailgun does change in a way that makes it an unreasonable solution, I will
probably switch to a Namecheap or ProtonMail mailbox. Until then, I'm happy to
have found a free solution for a custom domain email address.
